Spirituality 

“Some people worship the Almighty Allah in hope of reward; this is the worship of merchants. Some worship Allah for fear of punishment; this is the worship of servants. Still some others worship the Exalted Allah for thanking Him; and this is the worship of the tolerant. O Allah! I do not worship you for fear of punishment or in hope of reward; rather, I know you worthy of worshipping so I worship you.” - Ali ibn Abi Talib(as) [Biharul Anwar, Vol 41, p. 14]


In Islam spirituality of a person describes it’s individual connection with the divine Creator. This relationship between God and His servant enables the person to grow in his spiritual ranks. Imam Sajjad(as) was once reading a book in which Ali(as)’s worship was recorded. He put the book down and said  “Who can worship like Ali Ibn Abi Talib (A.S)?” [Biharul Anwar, Vol 41, p. 17]
His piety,  sincerity and immense worship made him attain such levels of spirituality where Allah bestowed some special favours and blessings upon him. The verses in this section will discuss a few of unique favors and titles given to him by the Almighty in lieu of being His true servant. 



Acceptance of Islam:

وَالَّذِي جَاءَ بِالصِّدْقِ وَصَدَّقَ بِهِ ۙ أُولَـٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُتَّقُونَ...

“He who brings the truth and he who confirms it—it is they who are the God wary.”
Surah Az-Zumar, Verse: 33

The verse refers about the time when Rasulullah(s) introduced the religion of Islam to his relatives and invited them to accept it. Imam Ali(as) was the only one to accept the faith and testified on his Prophethood. Rasulullah(s) accepted his faith and announced “Ali(as) will be his inheritor and deputy.”
It is important to understand that all the Prophets(s) and Imams(as) believe in the concept of tawhid from their birth. But they only declare it to others with the will of Allah in its due time.


Knower of Secrets:
حم
“Ha, Meem”
Surah Ash-Shura, Verse: 1

The tafseer from Ibney Abbas of this verse indicates that Imam Ali (as) just with the power and knowledge of these two Huruf Al Muqaṭṭaʿāt (mysterious letters) knew about the past, present and future nations that are to exist and the secrets about their crimes.


The Rope of Allah:

وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّـهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا ۚ 

“And hold firmly to the rope of Allah all together and do not become divided.”
Surah Aal-Imran, Verse:103

Once Rasulullah(s) was sitting in the mosque along with his companions, when a man approached him. He mentioned the above Verse and asked: “O Messenger of God! So what is this rope which God has commanded us to hold fast and not to separate from ?” Rasulullah(s) pondered for some time and then pointed towards Imam Ali(as) while saying “This is the rope of God, whoever holds fast to it will be protected from going astray in this world and the hereafter.”
It is also reported from Shaykh Al Tusi in his book Al-Amali, that Imam Jafar Sadiq had said : “We the Ahlulbayt (as) are the rope of Allah to which He has commanded to hold firmly.”
Sources: The Luminous Flashes (81st Name), Al-Burhan, vol.1, pp. 305-306. 


Allah’s Grace:

وَلَوْلَا فَضْلُ اللَّـهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لَاتَّبَعْتُمُ الشَّيْطَانَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا

“And were it not for Allah’s grace upon you and His mercy, you would have surely followed Satan, {all} except a few.”
Surah An-Nisa, Verse: 83

It is reported from Al-‘Ayyashi, the “mercy” is the Messenger of Allah (s) and the “grace” is ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as). The reverse meaning is also reported by the same narrator. Once he reported the meaning of this verse from the chains of narrations leading back to Imam Muhammad Baqir(as) that Allah’s “grace” is his messenger and His “mercy”, the friendship of the Imams (as).

Sources: The Luminous Flashes (170th Name), Al-Burhan, vol.1, p.398; and al-‘Ayyashi, vol.1, pp.260-261 


The Straight Path:


وَأَنَّ هَـٰذَا صِرَاطِي مُسْتَقِيمًا فَاتَّبِعُوهُ ۖ وَلَا تَتَّبِعُوا السُّبُلَ فَتَفَرَّقَ بِكُمْ عَن سَبِيلِهِ ۚ 




“This indeed is My straight path, so follow it, and do not follow (other) ways, for they will separate you from His way.”
Surah Al-Anaam, Verse: 153




It has been narrated by Jabir ibn Abdullah, once Rasulullah(s) was sitting amongst his companions when he pointed towards Imam Ali (as) and said: “This is a straight path, so follow it.”
Ibrahim al Thaqafi also reported in his book that the “straight path” in this verse is Ali ibn Abi Talib(as). Rasulullah(s) had said “I asked Allah to appoint it for Ali and HE did.

Sources: The Luminous Flashes (198th Name), Al-Burhan, vol.1, p.563



Caller on the Day of Judgement :

فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ أَن لَّعْنَةُ اللَّـهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ
Then a caller will announce in their midst, “May Allah’s curse be on the wrongdoers!”
Surah Al-A’raf, Verse: 44


Jabir al Ju’fi narrates from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as), once Imam Ali(as) was informed that Muawiyah had abused him and had killed his companions. So he stood and delivered a sermon. In that sermon he mentioned this verse and said: 
“I am the caller in this world and the hereafter.”
Abu Salih ibn Abbas is reported to have said: In Qur’an ‘Ali(as) has names of which people have no knowledge, amongst them is this verse. Imam Ali (as) will cry on the day of judgement:
“The curse of Allah is on those who deny my friendship and deem light my claim.”

Sources: The Luminous Flashes (206th Name), Al-Burhan, vol.2, p.17.

Allah’s Light:

الَّذِينَ يَتَّبِعُونَ الرَّسُولَ النَّبِيَّ الْأُمِّيَّ الَّذِي يَجِدُونَهُ مَكْتُوبًا عِندَهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالْإِنجِيلِ.….فَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِهِ وَعَزَّرُوهُ وَنَصَرُوهُ وَاتَّبَعُوا النُّورَ الَّذِي أُنزِلَ مَعَهُ ۙ أُولَـٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ ﴿١٥٧﴾

“Those who follow the Apostle, the untaught prophet, whose mention they find written with them in the Torah and the Gospel….
Those who believe in him, honour him, and help him and follow the light that has been sent down with him, they are the felicitous.”
Surah Al-A’raf, Verse:157

Ahmad ibn Muhammad narrates from Imam Baqir(as) that Rasulullah(s), his executor Imam Ali(as) and al-Qaim (as) are the ones who are mentioned in Torah and Gospel.
It is stated by Al-Ayyashi that Imam Ali(as) is referred to as the “Light that has been sent down with Rasulullah(s)”. 

 I and -Prophet Muhammad (s)

 Purifier For Hearts:

 وَيُنَزِّلُ عَلَيْكُم مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً لِّيُطَهِّرَكُم بِهِ وَيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمْ رِجْزَ الشَّيْطَانِ…

 “And He sent down water from sky to purify you with it, and repel from you the defilement of Satan.”
 Surah- Al-Anfaal, Verse: 11

 Al-A’yashi reports from Jabir, who once asked Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) the inward sense of this verse. The Imam replied “The sky inwardly, is Rasulullah(s) and the water is ‘Ali(as). Allah has made Ali(as) from Rasulullah(s). So Allah purifies the heart, repels defilement of Satan and strengthens the heart of whomever befriends Ali(as).”  

 Sources: The Luminous Flashes (222th-225th Name)
 Al-‘Ayyashi, vol.2, p.50; & al-Burhan, vol.2, p.69. 



 Allah’s Help:

 وَإِن يُرِيدُوا أَن يَخْدَعُوكَ فَإِنَّ حَسْبَكَ اللَّـهُ ۚ هُوَ الَّذِي أَيَّدَكَ بِنَصْرِهِ وَبِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ 

 But if they desire to deceive you, Allah is indeed sufficient for you. It is He who strengthened you with His help and with the means of the faithful.
 Surah Al-Anfaal, Verse:62
 It is narrated by Ibn Asker, when Rasulullah (s) ascended to the heavens he saw the following lines inscribed on the side of the Throne.“There is no god but God, Muhammad is My servant and messenger, whom I have strengthened with Ali (as).”Hence Allah revealed this verse as a reference to what Rasulullah(s) had witnessed in the heavens. In the above verse Imam Ali (as) is not only referred to as Allah’s help but a firm believer as well.
 Sources: The Luminous Flashes (227th&228th Name),Al-Burhan, vol.2, p.91. 


 Divider of Heaven and Hell:

 وَبَيْنَهُمَا حِجَابٌ ۚ وَعَلَى الْأَعْرَافِ رِجَالٌ يَعْرِفُونَ كُلًّا بِسِيمَاهُمْ ۚ وَنَادَوْا أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ أَن سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ ۚ لَمْ يَدْخُلُوهَا وَهُمْ يَطْمَعُونَ 
 “There will be a veil between them. And on the elevations will be certain men who recognize each of them by their mark. They will call out to the inhabitants of paradise, “Peace be to you!” They will not have entered it, though they would be eager to do so.”
 Surah Al-A’raf, Verse: 46

 A’raf is a place between hell and heaven where those who will have equal amounts of good and bad deeds will be placed. It is mentioned in many traditions that on the day of judgement Imam Ali (as) will be standing on an elevation in A’raf along with other men. They will recognize their friend from the light which will be emitting from their faces and will bring them towards heaven. However their enemy will carry a dark mark on the face and Imam(as) will recognize them through it. The
 enemies of Ahlulbait (as) will be dragged to hell from A’raf.

